hey there fellow aqua files I improve it
and this is Jim Davis and in an effort
to curry favor with our Aquaman fans we
will discuss now more no more and
instead go back to that first lesson we
learned from our first case of crabs
under the sea darling it's better down
where it's wetter take it from the
Tritons we're discussing them on web DM
this episode is brought to you by nerd
our keys out of the box encounters live
on Kickstarter the nerd artists were
some of the first youtubers to reach out
in contact us and we got started
we've played D&D with them and they know
what makes for a fun RPG session out of
the box encounters has all kinds of
options for integrating the encounters
into your campaign and giving you all
the information you need to anticipate
your players questions go check them out
link here and in the description and
stay nerdy ok Jim let us plunge the
depths of the oceans embrace the deep
cold and as it embraces us we can't
escape you can't escape I mean you get a
swim speed but Triton's perhaps it's
research or fortuitous or whatever but
we did watch Aquaman recently we did
watch Aquaman recently and I loved it
insane exposition at every turn but the
epic action adventure that happens
underwater that's pretty tasty
inspirational right I started thinking
about this and not just Triton's in
general but on a big tangent for a
minute yeah I read a lot of Keith
Baker's blog ever on creator he has a
blog Larry talks about all the different
DD subjects and stuff and one of them
was a digression on the undersea empires
of ever on and how cool Toa and Sagwa
NAND and Triton and merfolk all have
these like worlds spanning undersea
empires one of the things that he always
wanted to do is like write a book or
some kind of supplement that was it
takes place entirely underneath the
waves and like details the you know how
these various empires and countries have
clashed and have their own history and
everything and like the only other
setting that I have seen it takes
undersea civilizations as seriously as
like this is a thing that exists in the
world that influences the creatures
honor the cultures on land and vice for
whatever is the wilder lands of high
fantasy setting which has Triton's and
merfolk in it and one of the cities
there the viridis stan the city state of
the world upper I think is like the
world Emperor there has subjugated the
Tritons of Dolphin Bay or whatever it is
and like keeps their emissaries locked
in tanks in his throne room that he's
sort of like as trophies of conquest and
goes around and knocks on the glass
every day I like it because it is you
know we focus so much on the surface
right the you know there's either you
know what's going on on the human
kingdoms and the elven realms and the
dwarf holds and the like and maybe you
venture underground into the
subterranean world of the Underdark but
so rarely do you go underneath the waves
and realize that there is a whole
fantasy world down here too they've got
you know threats and monsters and
civilizations and magic and why wouldn't
they also trade with the surface why
wouldn't they also talk and and
communicate and be integrated it seems
to me that some smart wizards would do
some dealings with those that could get
access to sweet sweet pearls sweet sweet
pearls and all those special ingredients
that are underwater and you know like
what kind of spells can you cast with
minerals from an undersea volcanic vent
kind of fireball would you cast from
underwater it like a back like a little
bee like it's some kind of weird manta
ray guano or yeah you're like powdered
coral or something like that yeah I
think probably like it's a fireball that
just like flash boils water and creates
like this maybe an obscures vision for a
minute as it like creates a bunch of
bubbles and and it like but it like
flash boils the whole thing is called a
little less damaged and like for another
like round or two it's almost like a fog
cloud yeah yeah something like that is
they all sort of dissipate anything
frightens would be one of those people I
the wave wave hard-hard segue there
sometimes you gotta have the undertow
rip you right back the Riptide yeah back
on the track Triton's would obviously be
a part of this world I like this sort of
the backstory of the Tritons is as from
the elemental plane of water and it to
me it like reminds me of the city ABBA
lists who originated from the plane of
water
and at least in terms of like the
Tritons backstory and folow is it
suggests that there's a whole host of
aquatic monsters that came to the prime
material from the plane of water so
they're like invasive species into these
prime worlds and like the Tritons follow
them they're you know they feel like
some sort of responsibility for this is
because they were the guardians of it or
something I'm I don't even know if this
is how this relates to like other DD
lore for Triton's but it's it's an
interesting kind of take because it it
suggests number one that you're the
oceans of your world are just as
dangerous just as fantastical just as
wondrous as the other places of it but
also that somewhere down there are
portals to the elemental planes that
things can get through it's only by
these beings these people who have
decided that this is their
responsibility that whatever comes
through those portals doesn't take over
the world that just is cool to me
yeah I just I love that this is silent
war under the waves to keep the world
safe it's very Doctor Strange like like
defending us from some existential
threat whether it's space but in this
case like the water the plane of water
but love the idea of these civilizations
kind of springing up around these
portals that maybe brought their
ancestors here yeah and I find oh we're
in a new land
yeah and we could go back but you know
we found some bounty we found some
purpose here and oh
our enemies are coming through now yeah
so yeah we got to put a cap on this
thing and guard it it works for like
sort of a baseline trident and if you're
playing one that's just you know
emissary of their of their people or
like so we just like wandered up on land
and it's like well what's this world all
about or something like that you can
lean into that we're the silent
protectors and an archetype but I also
think Triton's work well is just like a
reskin just daring aquatic excuse me an
aquatic humanoid you know they can be re
skinned and in a variety of different
ways to get mutant fish people or you
know it costs maybe they are the result
of like magical evolution or something
like that humans that you know changed
themselves permanently in order to be
able to operate
better under the water you could see
something like you know returning to
ever on someone from like the laser
principalities I know in Forgotten
Realms there's those islands off the
Sword Coast where the the people they're
sort of worship a Kraken it's like
basically shadows over Innsmouth they
you know they all become deep ones as
they get older the aquatic heritage of
their ancestors becomes more and more
apparent and yeah maybe that could be
represented by Triton I like them for
that reason the ocean is a terrible and
wondrous place and it's full of bizarre
weird alien creatures and that's just
like our own oceans they inspire and
have so much going on in them that it
seems like a shame to not develop them
for your own world and like find a place
for Triton they're champions yes they're
there they're Nobles they're gonna live
got an elf vibe yeah they do have like
that kind of like better than a little
bit that haughtiness to them we have
this I wouldn't say divine purpose but
we have this purpose of protection and
whatever and generally they're kind of
ignorant of the surface so taking all
that kind of into account what are some
good concepts I mean like I can tell you
one that I have yeah because I literally
made it last night for your upcoming
underwater game yes I do have I am
prepping for an underwater but after
watching Aquaman I'm like come on I got
to do a noble I'm gonna do a warlock hex
blade sure and we get one on common item
so I'm taking that trident a fish
command baby that's my hex blade that's
the thing that is call it has called to
me and so I can't wait to play because
you know just the stat boosts alone it's
it really it's right there for a warlock
it's there for a lot of a lot of classes
I like them as paladin's right like I
think they fit Palin's really well you
could do devotion you could do ancients
yeah you know that angels definitely I
could even see you know depending on how
you structure their you know their
society and how advanced your you know
undersea civilizations are they could be
like oh that crowns
like that or if they're how aggressive
they are like a certain king
they could be oath of conquest I mean if
they believe that the ocean should rule
I mean there is that as well right like
they've got that the arrogance and sort
of haughtiness can be translated into
you know well yeah we don't know
anything about the surface world like
why would we need to you know like it's
just gonna get swallowed up one day I
know enough it doesn't have enough water
you can't see that right like if you're
a especially if you don't have buy-in to
the plane or origins for them and they
are sort of like a and indigenous
aquatic people to your world then they
may see themselves as the first
intelligent peoples because all life
comes from the sea they are some of the
first ones to develop civilization like
screw those dragons and elves like you
guys needed gods to do that right like
you had to have gods come down and help
you out we did this ourselves we scraped
ourselves out of the muck of the Seas
and formed ourselves so you could feel
like that and in that sense you know
they would have kind of a you know the
rest of the world belongs to us because
it's we are the first sort of attitude
about the surface or even other undersea
people's good paladin's they're Morlocks
as well storm sorcerers Oh like the
storms oh yeah no it'd be nice and tasty
but even if you're just a fighter yeah
you're a fighter that leads I mean you
you know you're gonna have at least a
little little bump to charisma it works
so well anytime you can get con and a
physical another physical stat and a
mentals fat I mean like anything that
gets three bumps just like that yeah I
like the three plus ones and I think
that it'd be it'd be interesting to see
more of the player race options to go
that route I really kind of see it for
hobgoblins
you know like hobgoblins have that weird
sort of like con int but you could
easily do strength con and you know and
and just plus one each of those so I
like that again the rest of their
abilities kind of like tie in to make a
character that has a strong theme and is
also like you might not think about it
you might not you might think like the
ability to operate independently
underwater
and have all these ability these aquatic
abilities like it's not gonna matter
it's not gonna come up and yet almost
every time that I have included a water
hazard in a dungeon in an environment or
something where it's like you've got to
go underwater you've got to navigate say
an underground river or there's a
subterranean Lake or you got across this
body of water for something like it's
always a challenge it's always one of
those things where players are like aw
like no I don't know I don't have
the water breathing ritual never use it
the vigilante game that I was in near
the beginning when we were still like
5th 4th 5th 6th level around that time
there was a big part that was all
underwater we were fighting so Hoglund
there was a little some Triton's in
there but there were some dire sharks
that we had to fight but luckily we did
have a druid yeah that could cast water
breathing but of course they had
sorcerers and sometimes in the middle of
fights and things at least there was a
couple times we had underwater things
and at one point it was like yeah
they're casting the spell on our water
breath and you know like you really have
to think about these things and think
them through it adds a fun challenge to
me but yeah if you don't have to worry
about that but you don't have to worry
about it and I consider being able to
operate independently underwater to be
one of those benchmarks of an adventurer
that by the time there get to say tier 3
or whatever - 2 or 3 where I kind of
expect yeah you guys are adventurers you
need to have some recourse even if it is
magic and can be taken away from you so
like having a creature it's like I got a
swim speed I'm amphibious plus I can
talk I can communicate you know sort of
rudimentary ideas to the life that we're
gonna find down here and I can go
anywhere down here it doesn't matter how
cold it is doesn't matter how deep it is
I'm gonna be fine
and in that sense you've got a more
versatile character who is competent in
a variety of environments and that
appeals to me strongly and in that sense
I'll take that for almost any character
concept you know whether it's a totem
barbarian where it's like I'm a shark
totem Triton you know and I just reskin
say the wolf abilities or something like
that I'm a whale totem Triton and that's
where the bear comes from or even just
make up others you know octopus you know
totem barbarian get a grappling maybe
that's that your two weapon the fighter
barbarian or pretty grappling some giant
squid
Kraken
crackin totem or it's like a ranger ride
beast companion Ranger Sonoran with the
dolphin ya dolphin shark Orca or octopus
or any other number of weird creatures
that you might want to have the more I
talk about it the more I want to have an
entire campaign that takes place
underwater just because these are I'll
do a rundown for you guys
kouha TOA merfolk maro SOG one la casa
which are another kind of sea devil type
monster for prior editions triton seals
and some types of lizard folk you'd
easily see like sea iguanas or something
like that it's being part of this world
and like that is as even a auntie-ji you
can have like more like water moccasin
you know yeah all you have to do you
know amphibious as a trait and that's it
he's a swim speed it's so easy to do
those are is many options nearly as on
the surface that are available to you
obviously not all the books but you know
it's that is a good array of options you
have all different kinds of archetypes
involved you can have vast undersea
kingdoms and explorations and coral
dungeons expeditions to deep trenches to
find you know lost ships that have been
wrecked and recover things from the
surface or you know traveling to other
aquatic planes to treat with the people
that live there or to banish you know
some sort of aquatic horror back to
where it came from
you can do all kinds of things nearly
everything that you can do on the
surface you can do underneath the waves
but it's it's got that added alienness
to it it's got the fact what I love
about like the ocean is that it's all
connected you step into it and you're
immediately connected through the water
to just about anywhere else and it's not
like say the land where there's you know
you're bound to the surface right it's
terrestrial whereas under water you're
swimming it's it's three-dimensional the
the places that you can visit the things
that you can do are more expansive in
that since it like really inspires me to
do something new and interesting and
different with these creatures as
opposed to just like tacking them on to
a setting and being like oh yeah there's
a whole civilization underwater people
out there and then like you never talk
about it it does not really matter what
you pick right you're probably gonna be
just fine probably just fine you can
imagine them being friends with like
save water Ganassi and the two of them
or even just like Triton's are another
type of elemental humanoid you know
they're they just are and maybe they're
more water than then you know flesh or
maybe they are more like fish people and
may you give them like full-on gills and
you know bug eyes and fins and they look
way more or like deep ones or something
than they do yeah look closer to Suhag
one right yeah thank you man
those are the ways I'd be the reskin
they're sort of use them conceptually
but yeah like I said more I talked about
the more I want to just write this up
yeah most definitely well in order to
prep you're gonna have to know all of
their abilities yes so let's start
running down we already mentioned it but
like getting that plus one to strength
con and charisma I mean that's just a
it's a good array abilities I mean did
health might and appeal I mean that's
you know you're ready for the cover of a
magazine
Fabio he was a trident I like the stat
distribution their swim speed amphibious
obviously required for creatures are
gonna operate underwater but it's the
like controlling air and water ability
like sort of like their innate magic
about it that to me says they maybe are
partially elemental themselves obviously
complains you know right off the bat
being able to cast fog cloud once a day
third level you get Gus to win once a
day and then wall of water at fifth
level yeah now question Jim yeah and
this is purely it has nothing to do with
the character that I've made but fog
cloud and gust of wind are those just
above water abilities or work or do you
use those can you use those under the
sea I mean I would say by their
definition fog clouds probably not gonna
be useful under the sea because fog is
just like what vaporized water you know
I mean like it's it's you know but you
could say they're math abilities mastery
of air and water control of air and
water so fog cloud might be just a you
summon like millions of tiny bubbles
around you that obscure sight and you
just can they just keep generating them
and they dissipate or float to the
surface but in that localized area it
sort of creates
this you know confusing whatever I you
know you can see this in our own world
like dolphins that round up fish my
likes either flapping their tails to
sort of create a lot of bubbles and
confusion or like disturbing the bottom
of the sea floor to kind of create
limited visibility and trap fish it
could also be like ink cloud where you
see if it's like a squirt of just sort
of ink that you know that fills the
water and sort of obscures things for
the minute or it could even just be like
you stirring up the dust of the the
seafloor of the seafloor and bringing it
up to wherever it is that you are at
same stats wouldn't change anything
about it but you will it allow it
definitely allow it yeah it would it's
not gonna be a cloud of fog it's gonna
be something else in gust of wind what
about that a gust of wind is the same
thing it can either be like you're
summoning a bunch of air under water and
it's and it forces the water out of the
way and and creates the same kind of
situation like just like a G out of
water it could be just like a jet of
water where it's not even air at all and
you just like are shooting out a stream
of water like Oh like a pool or
something all right that's all I need to
know I'm out I'll see you next Sunday I
mean this is the way it is with like all
kinds of spells I mean just like briefly
digress on that in that spells will
obviously operate differently underwater
especially those that summon energies
that are incompatible with being
submerged and thinking specifically of
like say fire and lightning but you know
perhaps it's one of those things where
like thunder damage is increased
underwater because sound travels better
through water than it does say air or
fire doesn't create the fire smells
don't create fire they create hyper
boiled water cavitate the water yeah or
it like flash regular flash boils it so
much that it just creates a localized
pocket of steam that that skalds you and
then the superheated water around it
rushes in to fill that vacuum and that's
what's well yeah well see to me
technically though that would be like
thunder damage because that's what the
mantis shrimp does this little it can it
creates sonic boobs with its little
claws that just not that stuns and
knocks things out use your common sense
in Prior Edition something like a
lightning bolt turned from like a a you
know bolt of lightning that you shoot
to a an AoE fireball that does
electricity and you take the damage like
centered on you you're touching the
water do you touch from the water too
unless you know but if you're saying a
vocre and can sculpt spells then maybe
you can still control that kind of
energy and not you know get yourself
caught up in all of it even if you
change the way that those damage types
work underwater now honestly on this one
it's common sense and the fact that the
Dean these spells already give you
everything you need to know to reskin
them they tell you what saves to use
they give you the parameters and spell
it and that's up to you as the DM or
player to be like this is what it looks
like underwater or where this is like
the specific version that might
character casts because they're from an
underwater people I cast Thunder ball
I'm not gonna sing this song I promise
moving on to emissary of the seat yeah
oh you can't you know talk to fish nah
you've gotta talk to them you can talk
to me the same way that like a forest
gnome can talk to critters you know and
and I think it's this is one of those
where I will play this one probably is
more powerful than it is and you know
for one what is a fish No why wouldn't
be talking of fish I'd probably talk
about dolphins and octopi and those
under the seat no the smarter truth yeah
I'm not gonna talk to little Guppies and
minnows and things like that come on
come was there a big boom lately that's
about all this
was there a loud noise that's about it
thanks Nemo your parents are over there
the emissary of the sea ability I
probably would play up as more powerful
than it is as a ribbon ability the
ability to talk to just sort of animals
and the like is not gonna break your
game particularly if you're cognizant of
sort of like which animals are
intelligent which animals are maybe
beyond intelligent and actually sort of
like willing to converse and able to
they're not just dumb animals they're
sit around wait for some way that it
will actually talk to its role playing
opportunity anytime there's a chance to
facilitate communication in the game
world right whether it's a character
knowing a language a character you know
having an audience with an NPC that
they'd like to talk to I would rather
lean on the side of giving them too much
information
having the avenues of communication be
too open then too restrictive and so I'd
rather say like yeah you can just talk
to aquatic creatures down here because
that leaves the door open for me to like
pass on information that the party might
need to know in an organic manner that
doesn't feel forced it's a way to like
learn more about the setting if the
player wants to and you know it's an
option available to them and if it's
more expansive then it's more likely to
be used move it on to kind of their last
ability here guardians of the depths
which I think this completely makes
sense
I mean having cold resistance it's cold
down there and the rigors of deep water
the pressure and everything don't get to
them which you know it also accounts for
their +1 strengths you know what I mean
and and their Constitution it's and the
like I like how these like to me all of
these abilities really feel
tied to their environment like this is
exactly how they would evolve
acknowledging all of that what effects
like bringing one of these characters to
the surface of like yeah you're far
inland you're not anywhere near the
water now hopefully you know do whatever
Ghost of saltmarsh whenever it is out
will give you an opportunity to play
something like this if you haven't but
you're playing like say a traditional
game of Dungeons and Dragons and it
doesn't feature water features that much
like what do you how does your Triton
get on land yeah they do a running about
well I hate to keep going back to it
since we just watched it but I mean not
every place used to be land right in
your world some places might have y'all
used to be at one point there's a sea
there whether it's their questing for an
object of power or an ancestral homeland
or a family heirloom like oh my
ancestors are from these mountains back
you know a thousand years ago when this
was an ocean and I have to recover their
signet ring maybe we're given something
in a will and it requires the signet
ring to unlock the box but it's like oh
yeah by the way it's a great grandma
back in the mountains yeah it's over
there this is where I would probably do
a Triton far traveler as a background
like you are you are a long way from
home and your background is the way that
like people are gonna look at you and
your if you're doing the kind of
greenish or blueish tinted skin you know
whether you have gills or not you get
dry out if you're outside it's like he's
got a go jump in the river every couple
days I'm sorry I would play that up like
I'm more comfortable in the water it's
always always taking baths always taking
baths if there's a river we get to a
town first thing I'm doing checking in
jumping in the river but play those
things up like that I mean you know your
your fish out of water but you don't
need to stay in the water I like that
idea
especially the far traveler because far
traveler has those interesting features
that kind of like reinforces the the
other worldliness of certain people's
thinking like gives you that opportunity
to play an emissary or something like
that
along those lines I might do like lower
bard and combine it with either sage or
the anthropologist background from two
of 9/8 late to momen I elation and now
the Triton is more of a Marco Polo
figure or an explorer type and they've
got some magic so they can you know use
and I'd probably go lean really heavily
into the water spells for that and
mostly though they are there to to fix
the ignorance that Triton Society has
about the surface world and so they are
there as like yeah I'm here to learn as
much as I can I'm I'm part of say maybe
I'm part of an official diplomatic
mission you know or maybe I'm just on my
own you know it's your job to like
introduce yourselves to the various
courts of the land what do they know
what do they know about us are they
friendly would they be willing to trade
are they is there a place for us on the
surface is there a place for them
underneath the waves that might be in
the character that I play and you're
sort of like there as a goodwill
ambassador to this newly discovered
people's yeah or something like that see
I can see I can see it that way or you
play it that way
externally but you are the first Scout
in the coming conquest you go up there
find out as much as you can about them
yeah see if they'd be willing to you
know that's like the sinister secret in
your background is you're just like a
cat's paw and and it's like okay they
picked you because you're naive and
trusting and have a curiosity about the
world and what's above it people back
home know they're not interested in any
of the things they say they are they are
interested in something else actually
and that's even more interesting here
the secret cats ball and so through
adventuring somebody feel like actually
there it looks like they're forming for
war and you're with them then you get to
have the you against your own people
thing what I love the most
is the conceptual ground that they open
up and and the fact that underwater
adventures and underwater fantasy
locations are pardon the pun
you know unexplored depths of of gaming
and you know for this crusty old
barnacle gamer like myself it's the new
and novel that really draws to me yes
let the oceans scrub away all of the
rough surfaces like the stone just like
the stone let the ocean envelop you
every crevice every fold the warm
envelope embrace of the ocean mm-hmm
so erotic so erotic and so wet if you
liked the video give it a thumbs up and
subscribe if you need more web DM talk
we've got a podcast and a whole lot more
on our patreon we just talked to
Wolfgang Bower the head of COBOL press
about DMD his career and more it's
available free so download it now oh and
he gave our patrons a huge discount on
some great stuff to link here and in the
description okay are we done now